Allow reuse of a subset of the layers of another COLR glyph (#87)
googlefonts/colr-gradients-spec: colr-gradients-spec.md

`mode`. Compositing modes are taken from Compositing modes are taken from the
[W3C Compositing specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/compositing-1/).

## COLR Glyph 

`PaintColrGlyph` is a special paint which allows reuse of a COLR glyph of this  

> proposed exension as a paint. Painting a `PaintColorGlyph` means executing the

Reviewer: we need to fix this terminology confusion between `PaintColorGlyph` and `PaintColrGlyph`. Let use the latter only

Author: Done

paint operations that are described by the `BaseGlyphV1Record` matching the
glyph id `gid` specified in `PaintColorGlyph`. See section [Reusable Parts](#reusable-parts).  

## COLR Layers

`PaintColrLayers` is a special paint which allows reuse of some or all of a COLR

> v1 glyph as a paint. It points into a list of Paint pointers and specifies how many

Reviewer: from your definition, it doesn't seem to "point _into_ a list" but rather "point _to_" a list, and the list struct (`ArrayOf`) has its own count value just before the array of offsets.

Author: Fixed now, I think

## COLR Glyph

`PaintColrGlyph` is a special paint which allows reuse of a COLR glyph of this
proposed exension as a paint. Painting a `PaintColrGlyph` means executing the
paint operations that are described by the `BaseGlyphV1Record` matching the
glyph id `gid` specified in `PaintColrGlyph`. See section [Reusable Parts](#reusable-parts).  

## COLR Layers

`PaintColrLayers` is a special paint which allows reuse of some or all of a COLR
v1 glyph as a paint. It points to a sequence of Paint pointers and specifies how many
to consume. This allows reuse of partial COLR Glyphs. For example, suppose glyph
A has 10 layers, 3 of which are a common backdrop that glyph B also uses. Glyph B
can define a PaintColrLayers record that points into A's layers and specifies how

> many to take.

Reviewer 2: I suggest to move the example to a _note_, or _example_  paragraph.

Author: Done

| Type | Field name | Description |
|-|-|-|
| uint8 | numLayers |  |

> | Offset32 | paintOffset[numLayers] | Offsets to Paint tables, from the start of the LayerV1List table. |

Reviewer: I guess you could have kept the part `, from the start of the LayerV1List table.` in here, it's still valid.

Author: I prefer not because then it's inconsistently remarked upon and we do have the global rule about always relative to containing struct.

Glyph outline is used as clip mask for the content in the Paint subtable. Glyph ID must be less than the numGlyphs value in the &#39;maxp&#39; table.

##### PaintColrSlice table (format 5)

| Type | Field name | Description |
|-|-|-|
| uint8 | format | Set to 5. |
| uint16 | glyphID | Virtual glyph ID for a BaseGlyphV1List base glyph. |

> | uint8 | firstLayer | First layer to take from the glyph identified by glyphID  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| uint8 | firstLayerIndex | Index of the first layer to take from the glyph identified by glyphID  |
```

Reviewer: Even if it may seem obvious, we should clarify that these indices follow zero-based numbering.

Also, we should say what client should do if the index is invalid (last > first, or if out of bounds). Probably the only thing to do would be to discard the invalid PaintColrSlice.

Reviewer: > if out of bounds

it's an unsigned 8-bit integer, just like LayerV1List.LayerCount, so it's guaranteed to always be in-bound.

Reviewer: Let me correct myself again.
Say a base color glyph only has n=5 layers; if the requested layer range max exceeds the available layers (`lastLayerIndex >= n`), I believe the client should _not_ reject the PaintColorSlice, but it should _clamp_ the lastLayerIndex value to `n-1`.

> | uint8 | lastLayer | Last layer to take from the glyph identified by glyphID |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| uint8 | lastLayerIndex | Index of the last layer to take from the glyph identified by glyphID |
```

Glyph outline is used as clip mask for the content in the Paint subtable. Glyph ID must be less than the numGlyphs value in the &#39;maxp&#39; table.

> ##### PaintColrSlice table (format 5)

Reviewer: did you mean to undo this change? I thought you wanted to restore the current PaintColrGlyph and add a new paint format 8 for a list of layers?

| Type | Field name | Description |
|-|-|-|
| uint8 | format | Set to 5. |
| uint16 | glyphID | Virtual glyph ID for a BaseGlyphV1List base glyph. |
| uint8 | firstLayerIndex | First layer to take from the glyph identified by glyphID. 0-based. |
| uint8 | lastLayerIndex | Index of the last layer to take from the glyph identified by glyphID, inclusive. 0-based. |

Glyph ID must be in the BaseGlyphV1List; may be greater than maxp.numGlyphs. If firstLayerIndex is greater than the number of layers
available in the base glyph or lastLayerIndex < firstLayerIndex
the `PaintColrSlice` is invalid. If lastLayerIndex > the number of
layers available in the base glyph then all layers from firstLayerIndex
to the last available layer should be retained.

A range 0..255 therefore means "all available layers." A range 0..0 means

> just the first layer.

Reviewer: I guess the whole paragraph above should be removed now

If compositeMode value is not recognized, COMPOSITE_CLEAR is used.

##### PaintColrLayers table (format 8)

| Type | Field name | Description |
|-|-|-|
| uint8 | format | Set to 8. |
| uint8 | numLayers | Number of offsets to Paint to read from layers. |

> | Offset32 | layers | Pointer to a series of Offset32 to Paint. |

Reviewer: all the offset fields in COLRv0 table currently end with "Offset", so I would suggest to rename this to `paintListOffset`

```suggestion
| Offset32 | paintListOffset | Offset (from beginning of PaintColrLayers table) to PaintList. |
```

Author: I think this goes away with the global root list

If compositeMode value is not recognized, COMPOSITE_CLEAR is used.

##### PaintColrLayers table (format 8)

| Type | Field name | Description |
|-|-|-|
| uint8 | format | Set to 8. |
| uint8 | numLayers | Number of offsets to Paint to read from layers. |

> | uint32 | firstLayerIndex | Index into the LayerV1List referenced by the COLR v1 header. |

Reviewer: i believe this is redundant, there's only one LayerV1List now

```suggestion
| uint32 | firstLayerIndex | Index into the LayerV1List. |
```

> Each layer is COMPOSITE_SRC_OVER previous.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps reads easier if we say: "Each layer is composited on top of the previous with mode COMPOSITE_SRC_OVER", ditto for in the structs section?

Author: Done, ty

##### Acyclic Graphs Only

`PaintColrGlyph` and `PaintColrLayers` allow recursive composition of
COLR glyphs. This is desirable for reusable parts but introduces the
possibility of a cyclic graph. Implementations should fail if a cycle

> is detected.

Reviewer 2: > Implementations should fail if a cycle is detected.

I would suggest to make this stricter and spell it out, similar to as in the pseudocode, for example:

Implementations must not render anything for a COLRv1 if a cycle is detected during processing. A cycle occurs when traversing down a branch of the paint graph, a Paint is referenced a second time after already having been visited.

- during the processing of `PaintColrGlyph` the a `PaintColrGlyph` is encountered that points to the same `glyphID`.
- during the processing of `PaintColrLayers` a `PaintColrLayers` is encountered that points to the

Author: I think you can operate purely on Paint and ignore glyphID? - will add a clearer definition. In fact, maybe I'll just move the cycle detection bit up from Rendering to here.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the update and moving it here. I think you're right that it's sufficient to operate on `Paints`. How about turning _should fail_ into a _must fail_?

##### Bounded Layers Only

> The `BaseGlyphV1Record` paint must be bounded.

Reviewer 2: Suggest to clarify bounded. Previous phrasing had at least "bounded region", for example:

The `BaseGlyphV1Record` paint must be bounded, which means it must only define a pixel color values for a limited area.

Author: Fixed.

##### Acyclic Graphs Only

`PaintColrGlyph` and `PaintColrLayers` allow recursive composition of
COLR glyphs. This is desirable for reusable parts but introduces the
possibility of a cyclic graph. Implementations should fail if a cycle
is detected.

*Note:* Cycle detection can be achieved by keeping a set of addresses of visited paints.
Before processing a paint check if it's address is in the set, if it is we have a cycle
and should fail. Once done processing a given paint, including children, take it's address
out of the set. This allows the same paint to be reached repeatedly as long as no
cycle is formed. Pseudocode:

```
# called initially with the base glyph paint and an empty set.
def paint(paint, active_paints)
  if paint in active_paints
    fail, we have a cyle
  add paint to active_paints

  process paint, potentially calling paint again for referenced paints

  remove paint from active_paints
```

##### Bounded Layers Only

The `BaseGlyphV1Record` paint must define a bounded region. That is,

> is must paint within an area for which a bounding box could be

Reviewer 2: is, is = is, it

Perhaps: "for which a _finite_ bounding box" to make it clear that the bounding box can't have ∞ in its coordinates.

Author: I like it, ty

                              // must be less than maxp.numGlyphs
}

struct PaintColrSlice
{
  uint8               format; // = 5
  uint16              gid;    // shall be a COLR gid

>   uint8               firstLayer;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  uint8               firstLayerIndex;
```

>   uint8               lastLayer;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  uint8               lastLayerIndex;
```

  Offset24<Paint>     backdrop;
};

// Each layer is COMPOSITE_SRC_OVER previous
struct PaintColrLayers
{
  uint8               format; // = 8
  Offset32<LayerList> layers;

>   uint8               numLayers;

Reviewer: The `LayerV1List` is already an `ArrayOf<Offset32<Paint>, uint8>`, where the array of offsets is immediately preceded  a (uint8) count value. What is this `numLayers` for? If it is the lenght of the array, then it would be duplicated.

Reviewer: is `numLayers` uint8 at the end of PaintColrLayers meant to specify how many layers to consume, to be able to reuse partial COLR Glyphs?
That means one can only share the initial numLayers from a LayerV1List -- what about if I want to reuse some other slice that doesn't start at the first layer?

Reviewer: I think we can just get rid of this `numLayers` (perhaps making this an `Offset24<LayerV1List>` to align to 2-byte boundaries).
When you want to reuse a list of layers you create a _new_ LayerV1List and point your base glyph (or some other parent paint) to it. The list will already contain an ArrayOf offsets to Paints, which comes its own count, thus no need for the extra numLayers.

If you really want to be able to take a slice of an existing array of Paints (instead of making a new list), you would need both a start index and a count (or an end index).

Author: Updated, I believe it now does what I actually wanted, ty :)

  Offset24<Paint>     backdrop;
};

// A reference directly into a series of Paint pointers

> typedef UnsizedArrayOf<Offset32<Paint>> PaintList;

Reviewer: Maybe this should be called `PaintOffsetList`, or `PaintOffsetArray`; it's not really a list of Paints but a list of offsets to Paint.

Reviewer: Also we should clarify what these Offset32 in the PaintList are relative to. In fonttools otTables, offsets are always relative to the parent table; in this case, they would be relative to the PaintList table itself which contains the array. Though it doesn't look like a "table", PaintList is actually a table containing a single element, i.e. the unsized array of offsets to Paint.

Author: Hm, per IM the rule about offset relative to containing struct is going to fall apart when we try to point partway into a sequence of offsets

Reviewer: I think we should have a global PaintList (really a PaintOffsetArray) inlined at the end of COLRv1 header or pointed to by an offset from the top-level table; then each PaintColrLayers would have both a firstPaintIndex and numPaints so it can refer to a slice of that array of offsets to Paint.

Author: First pass at updating per that comment uploaded, PTAL.

  Offset24<Paint>     backdrop;
};

// Each layer is COMPOSITE_SRC_OVER previous
// NOTE: uint8 size saves bytes in most cases and does not
// preclude use of large layer counts via PaintComposite or a tree
// of PaintColrLayers.
struct PaintColrLayers
{
  uint8               format; // = 8
  uint8               numLayers;
  uint32              firstLayerIndex;  // index into COLRv1::layersV1
}

struct BaseGlyphV1Record
{
  uint16                gid;

>   Offset32<Paint>       paint;  // Typically PaintColrLayers

Reviewer: you updated the c++ definition for BaseGlyphV1Record but forgot to also update the table layout in the preceding section. BaseGlyphV1Record still is pointing to LayerV1List in the table definition.

Author: Oh ty, fixing...

          (expected to be bounded by parent composite mode or clipped by current clip, check bounds?)
    7) PaintSolid
          SkCanvas::drawColor with color configured
    8) PaintColrLayers

>         Paint each referenced layer

Reviewer 2: Paint each referenced layer's paint, by performing a).

Author: Done

> 

Reviewer 2: I suggest to add a heading:

**Cycle detection**

Author: Done

While recursing down through paints, keep a set of addresses of visited paints.
Before processing a paint check if it's address is in the set, if it is we have a cycle
and should fail. Once done processing a given paint, including children, take it's address
out of the set. This allows the same paint to be reached repeatedly as long as no
cycle is formed. Pseudocode:

# called initially with the base glyph paint and an empty set.
def paint(paint, active_paints)
  if paint in active_paints
    fail, we have a cyle
  add paint to active_paints

  process paint, potentially calling paint again for referenced paints

  remove paint from active_paints

>  *1 (in the implementation, potentially collapse each pair as PaintComposite (3) with first gid as backdrop, second as src, or just draw on root SkCanvas directly)

Reviewer 2: This "footnote" is no longer referenced and can be removed.
